.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" (C) Copyright 2014 Jean-Francois Dockes <dockes@y.dockes.com>,
.\"
.TH UPMPDCLI 1 "February 10, 2014"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.SH NAME
upmpdcli \- UPnP Media Renderer and Media Server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B upmpdcli
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBupmpdcli\fP implements both an UPnP Media Renderer and Media Server.
.PP
As an UPnP Media Renderer, \fBupmpdcli\fP uses the Music Player Daemon, \fBmpd\fP, for processing
the audio streams (playing the music). This allows integrating the high quality and widely ported
\fBMPD\fP inside an UPnP music network, and controlling it from an UPnP Control Point, typically
running on a tablet or phone.
.PP
As an UPnP Media Server, \fBupmpdcli\fP provides both an interface to a local media library and a
set of proxy interfaces for external sources, such as streaming services or radio catalogs. All
supported and activated functions are presented as entries in the root directory of the Media
Server.
.SH OPTIONS
The program uses short command line options. A summary of options is included below. Most of the
configuration though is performed through parameters in a configuration file. See
upmpdcli.conf(5). Except for the \fI-c\fP option which designates the configuration file, the
command line options are little used and kept for backward compatibility.
.TP
.B \-c\fR \fIconfigfile\fP
Use the configuration from \fIconfigfile\fP. The configuration file has a
simple \fIname = value\fP format and can set the same values as the command
line options (with a lower priority). The parameter names are
\fImpdhost\fP, \fImpdport\fP, \fIfriendlyname\fP, \fIlogfilename\fP,
\fIloglevel\fP, \fIupnpiface\fP, \fIupnpport\fP. The configuration file can
also be used to set the MPD password (\fImpdpassword\fP), and the UPnP IP
address (instead of interface name, \fIupnpip\fP). See upmpdcli.conf(5).
Note that if this option is not given, no configuration file is read and the program runs entirely
from its defaults, command line options, and environment.
.TP
.B \-h\fR \fIhost\fP
Define the host machine on which \fBmpd\fP runs.
.TP
.B \-f\fR \fIfriendly_name\fP
Set the name which will be displayed by controllers for this instance after they search the network.
.TP
.B \-p\fR \fIport\fP
Define the IP port used by \fBmpd\fP.
.TP
.B \-q\fR \fI0|1\fP
Decide if we own the MPD queue (-q 1) or not (-q 0). We own it by default, and clear it fearlessly.
.TP
.B \-d\fR \fIlogfilename\fP
Send debug/trace messages to \fIlogfilename\fP.
.TP
.B \-l\fR \fIlevel\fP
Set the log verbosity (0-4).
.TP
.B \-D\fR
Daemonize (fork and run in background). Using -D for this is the reverse from usual convention, but
the authors found it better to avoid surprising naïve users with an unexpected disparition of the
program...
.TP
.B \-i\fR \fIiface\fP
Define the network interface to use for UPnP.
.TP
.B \-O\fR \f1/0\fP
Start the OpenHome ohMedia services (esp. PlayList), or not.
.TP
.B \-P\fR \fIport\fP
Define the IP port to use for UPnP.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mpd (1), upmpdcli.conf (5)
